he got it now, of course, finally. he'd been going about this all wrong. he should never have come here at all. he should never have fallen in love with alice. he should never even have come to brakebills. he should have stayed in brooklyn, in the real world. he should have nursed his depression and his grudge against the world from the relative safety of mundane reality. he could have eked out his sad wasted life with movies and books and masturbation and alcohol like everybody else. he would never have known the horror of really getting what he thought he wanted. he could have spared himself and everybody else the cost of it. if there was a moral to the story of martin chatwin, that was it in a nutshell. sure, you can live out your dreams, but it'll only turn you into a monster. better to stay home and do card tricks in your bedroom instead.

well, he wouldn't get fooled again. he wouldn't give anybody the chance. quentin felt a new attitude of detachment descend on him. his molten anger and grief were cooling into a glossy protective coating, a hard transparent lacquer of uncaring. if he couldn't go back, he would just have to do things differently going forward. he felt how infinitely safer and more sound this attitude was. the trick was just not wanting anything. that was power. that was courage: the courage not to love anyone or hope for anything. the funny thing about it was how easy everything got, when nothing mattered.

what he wanted now was control. he wanted to be untouchable. in his little cell quentin practiced things he'd never had time to master before, or never dared to try. he went back to the most advanced popper exercises gruesomely difficult, only theoretically executable etudes that he'd faked his way through back at brakebills. now he repeated them over and over again, smoothing out the rough edges. he invented new, even crueler versions and mastered them as well. he relished the pain in his hands, ate it up. his enchantments took on a power and precision and fluency they'd never had before. his fingertips left tracks of fire and sparks and neon indigo smears in the air, that buzzed and whined, too bright to look at directly. his brain glowed with cold, brittle triumph. only now, he thought, now that he had killed off his human emotions, only now that he didn't care anymore, could he wield truly superhuman power.

as the sweet spring air drifted through his room, and then the oven-hot summer air, and sweatpoured down his face, and the centaurs trotted by outside his door, lofty and incurious, he came to seehow mayakovsky had performed some of the feats quentin had found so baffling. in an emptymeadow he carefully reverse-engineered pennys flashy fireball spell. he found and corrected themistakes hed made in his senior project, the trip to the moon, and he finished alices project, too, inmemoriam, isolating and capturing a single photon and even observing it, heisenberg be damned: aninfinitely furious, precious, incandescent little wave-spark.

seated in the lotus position on top of the sun-faded florida desk, he allowed his mind to expanduntil it encompassed one, then three more, then six field mice in all as they went about their tinyurgent business in the grass outside his window. he summoned them to sit before him and, with athought, gently extinguished the electrical current that lived within each of them. their little fluffybodies went still and cold. then, just as easily, he touched each of them with magic, instantlyrelighting their tiny souls as if he were touching a match to the pilot light of a stove.

panicked, they scrambled in all directions. he let them go. alone in his room, he smiled at hissecret greatness. he felt lordly and munificent. he had tampered with the sacred mystery of life anddeath. what else was there in this world that could engage his attention? or in any world?
