quentin did a magic trick. nobody noticed.
they picked their way along the cold, uneven sidewalk together: james, julia, and quentin. james
and julia held hands. thats how things were now. the sidewalk wasnt quite wide enough, so
quentin trailed after them, like a sulky child. he would rather have been alone with julia, or just
alone period, but you couldnt have everything. or at least the available evidence pointed
overwhelmingly to that conclusion.
okay! james said over his shoulder. q. lets talk strategy.
james seemed to have a sixth sense for when quentin was starting to feel sorry for himself.
quentins interview was in seven minutes. james was right after him.
nice firm handshake. lots of eye contact. then when hes feeling comfortable, you hit him with a
chair and ill break his password and e-mail princeton.
just be yourself, q, julia said.
her dark hair was pulled back in a wavy bunch. somehow it made it worse that she was always so
nice to him.
how is that different from what i said?
quentin did the magic trick again. it was a very small trick, a basic one-handed sleight with a
nickel. he did it in his coat pocket where nobody could see. he did it again, then he did it backward.
i have one guess for his password, james said. password.
it was kind of incredible how long this had been going on, quentin thought. they were only
seventeen, but he felt like hed known james and julia forever. the school systems in brooklyn sorted
out the gifted ones and shoved them together, then separated the ridiculously brilliant ones from the
merely gifted ones and shoved them together, and as a result theyd been bumping into each other in
the same speaking contests and regional latin exams and tiny, specially convened ultra-advanced
math classes since elementary school. the nerdiest of the nerds. by now, their senior year, quentin
knew james and julia better than he knew anybody else in the world, not excluding his parents, and
they knew him. everybody knew what everybody else was going to say before they said it. everybody
who was going to sleep with anybody else had already done it. juliapale, freckled, dreamy julia,
who played the oboe and knew even more physics than he didwas never going to sleep with
quentin.
quentin was thin and tall, though he habitually hunched his shoulders in a vain attempt to brace
himself against whatever blow was coming from the heavens, and which would logically hit the tall
people first. his shoulder-length hair was freezing in clumps. he should have stuck around to dry it
after gym, especially with his interview today, but for some reasonmaybe he was in a selfsabotaging moodhe hadnt. the low gray sky threatened snow. it seemed to quentin like the world
was offering up special little tableaux of misery just for him: crows perched on power lines, steppedin dog shit, windblown trash, the corpses of innumerable wet oak leaves being desecrated in
innumerable ways by innumerable vehicles and pedestrians.
god, im full, james said. i ate too much. why do i always eat too much?
because youre a greedy pig? julia said brightly. because youre tired of being able to see your
feet? because youre trying to make your stomach touch your penis?
james put his hands behind his head, his fingers in his wavy chestnut hair, his camel cashmere coat
wide open to the november cold, and belched mightily. cold never bothered him. quentin felt cold
all the time, like he was trapped in his own private individual winter.
james sang, to a tune somewhere between good king wenceslas and bingo:
in olden times there was a boy
young and strong and brave-o
he wore a sword and rode a horse
and his name was dave-o . . .
god! julia shrieked. stop!
james had written this song five years ago for a middle-school talent show skit. he still liked to
sing it; by now they all knew it by heart. julia shoved him, still singing, into a garbage can, and when
that didnt work she snatched off his watch cap and started beating him over the head with it.
my hair! my beautiful interview hair!
king james, quentin thought. le roi samuse.
i hate to break up the party, he said, but weve got like two minutes.
oh dear, oh dear! julia twittered. the duchess! we shall be quite late!
i should be happy, quentin thought. im young and alive and healthy. i have good friends. i have
two reasonably intact parentsviz., dad, an editor of medical textbooks, and mom, a commercial
illustrator with ambitions, thwarted, of being a painter. i am a solid member of the middle-middle
class. my gpa is a number higher than most people even realize it is possible for a gpa to be.
but walking along fifth avenue in brooklyn, in his black overcoat and his gray interview suit,
quentin knew he wasnt happy. why not? he had painstakingly assembled all the ingredients of
happiness. he had performed all the necessary rituals, spoken the words, lit the candles, made the
sacrifices. but happiness, like a disobedient spirit, refused to come. he couldnt think what else to
do.
he followed james and julia past bodegas, laundromats, hipster boutiques, cell-phone stores
limned with neon piping, past a bar where old people were already drinking at three forty-five in the
afternoon, past a brown-brick veterans of foreign wars hall with plastic patio furniture on the
sidewalk in front of it. all of it just confirmed his belief that his real life, the life he should be living,
had been mislaid through some clerical error by the cosmic bureaucracy. this couldnt be it. it had
been diverted somewhere else, to somebody else, and hed been issued this shitty substitute faux life
instead.
maybe his real life would turn up in princeton. he did the trick with the nickel in his pocket again.
are you playing with your wang, quentin? james asked.
quentin blushed.
i am not playing with my wang.
nothing to be ashamed of. james clapped him on the shoulder. clears the mind.
the wind bit through the thin material of quentins interview suit, but he refused to button his
overcoat. he let the cold blow through it. it didnt matter, he wasnt really there anyway.
he was in fillory.
christopher plovers fillory and further is a series of five novels published in england in the
1930s. they describe the adventures of the five chatwin children in a magical land that they discover
while on holiday in the countryside with their eccentric aunt and uncle. they arent really on holiday,
of coursetheir father is up to his hips in mud and blood at passchendaele, and their mother has been
hospitalized with a mysterious illness that is probably psychological in nature, which is why theyve
been hastily packed off to the country for safekeeping.
but all that unhappiness takes place far in the background. in the foreground, every summer for
three years, the children leave their various boarding schools and return to cornwall, and each time
they do they find their way into the secret world of fillory, where they have adventures and explore
magical lands and defend the gentle creatures who live there against the various forces that menace
them. the strangest and most persistent of those enemies is a veiled figure known only as the
watcherwoman, whose horological enchantments threaten to stall time itself, trapping all of fillory at
five oclock on a particularly dreary, drizzly afternoon in late september.
like most people quentin read the fillory books in grade school. unlike most peopleunlike
james and juliahe never got over them. they were where he went when he couldnt deal with the
real world, which was a lot. (the fillory books were both a consolation for julia not loving him and
also probably a major reason why she didnt.) and it was true, there was a strong whiff of the english
nursery about them, and he felt secretly embarrassed when he got to the parts about the cozy horse,
an enormous, affectionate equine creature who trots around fillory by night on velvet hooves, and
whose back is so broad you can sleep on it.
but there was a more seductive, more dangerous truth to fillory that quentin couldnt let go of. it
was almost like the fillory booksespecially the first one, the world in the wallswere about
reading itself. when the oldest chatwin, melancholy martin, opens the cabinet of the grandfather
clock that stands in a dark, narrow back hallway in his aunts house and slips through into fillory
(quentin always pictured him awkwardly pushing aside the pendulum, like the uvula of a monstrous
throat), its like hes opening the covers of a book, but a book that did what books always promised to
do and never actually quite did: get you out, really out, of where you were and into somewhere better.
the world martin discovers in the walls of his aunts house is a world of magical twilight, a
landscape as black and white and stark as a printed page, with prickly stubblefields and rolling hills
crisscrossed by old stone walls. in fillory theres an eclipse every day at noon, and seasons can last
for a hundred years. bare trees scratch at the sky. pale green seas lap at narrow white beaches made
of broken shells. in fillory things mattered in a way they didnt in this world. in fillory you felt the
appropriate emotions when things happened. happiness was a real, actual, achievable possibility. it
came when you called. or no, it never left you in the first place.
they stood on the sidewalk in front of the house. the neighborhood was fancier here, with wide
sidewalks and overhanging trees. the house was brick, the only unattached residential structure in a
neighborhood of row houses and brownstones. it was locally famous for having played a role in the
bloody, costly battle of brooklyn. it seemed to gently reproach the cars and streetlights around it with
memories of its gracious old dutch past.
if this were a fillory novelquentin thought, just for the recordthe house would contain a secret
gateway to another world. the old man who lived there would be kindly and eccentric and drop
cryptic remarks, and then when his back was turned quentin would stumble on a mysterious cabinet
or an enchanted dumbwaiter or whatever, through which he would gaze with wild surmise on the
clean breast of another world.
but this wasnt a fillory novel.
so, julia said. give em hades.
she wore a blue serge coat with a round collar that made her look like a french schoolgirl.
see you at the library maybe.
cheers.
they bumped fists. she dropped her gaze, embarrassed. she knew how he felt, and he knew she
knew, and there was nothing more to say about it. he waited, pretending to be fascinated by a parked
car, while she kissed james good-byeshe put a hand on his chest and kicked up her heel like an oldtimey starletthen he and james walked slowly up the cement path to the front door.
james put his arm around quentins shoulders.
i know what you think, quentin, he said gruffly. quentin was taller, but james was broader, more
solidly built, and he pulled quen tin off balance. you think nobody understands you. but i do. he
squeezed quentins shoulder in an almost fatherly way. im the only one who does.
quentin said nothing. you could envy james, but you couldnt hate him, because along with being
handsome and smart he was also, at heart, kind and good. more than anybody else quentin had ever
met, james reminded him of martin chatwin. but if james was a chatwin, what did that make
quentin? the real problem with being around james was that he was always the hero. and what did
that make you? either the sidekick or the villain.
quentin rang the doorbell. a soft, tinny clatter erupted somewhere in the depths of the darkened
house. an old-fashioned, analog ring. he rehearsed a mental list of his extracurriculars, personal
goals, etc. he was absolutely prepared for this interview in every possible way, except maybe his
incompletely dried hair, but now that the ripened fruit of all that preparation was right in front of him
he suddenly lost any desire for it. he wasnt surprised. he was used to this anticlimactic feeling,
where by the time youve done all the work to get something you dont even want it anymore. he had
it all the time. it was one of the few things he could depend on.
the doorway was guarded by a depressingly ordinary suburban screen door. orange and purple
zinnias were still blooming, against all horticultural logic, in a random scatter pattern in black earth
beds on either side of the doorstep. how weird, quentin thought, with no curiosity at all, that they
would still be alive in november. he withdrew his ungloved hands into the sleeves of his coat and
placed the ends of the sleeves under his arms. even though it felt cold enough to snow, somehow it
began to rain.
it was still raining five minutes later. quentin knocked on the door again, then pushed lightly. it
opened a crack, and a wave of warm air tumbled out. the warm, fruity smell of a strangers house.
hello? quentin called. he and james exchanged glances. he pushed the door all the way open.
better give him another minute.
who even does this in their spare time? quentin said. i bet hes a pedophile.
the foyer was dark and silent and muffled with oriental rugs. still outside, james leaned on the
doorbell. no one answered.
i dont think anybodys here, quentin said. that james wasnt coming inside suddenly made him
want to go inside more. if the interviewer actually turned out to be a gatekeeper to the magical land of
fillory, he thought, it was too bad he wasnt wearing more practical shoes.
a staircase went up. on the left was a stiff, unused-looking dining room, on the right a cozy den
with leather armchairs and a carved, man-size wooden cabinet standing by itself in a corner.
interesting. an old nautical map taller than he was took up half of one wall, with an ornately barbed
compass rose. he massaged the walls in search of a light switch. there was a cane chair in one
corner, but he didnt sit.
all the blinds were drawn. the quality of the darkness was less like a house with the curtains
drawn than it was like actual night, as if the sun had set or been eclipsed the moment he crossed the
threshold. quen tin slow-motion-walked into the den. hed go back outside and call. in another
minute. he had to at least look. the darkness was like a prickling electric cloud around him.
the cabinet was enormous, so big you could climb into it. he placed his hand on its small, dinged
brass knob. it was unlocked. his fingers trembled. le roi samuse. he couldnt help himself. it felt
like the world was revolving around him, like his whole life had been leading up to this moment.
it was a liquor cabinet. a big one, there was practically a whole bar in there. quentin reached back
past the ranks of softly jingling bottles and felt the dry, scratchy plywood at the back just to make sure.
solid. nothing magical about it. he closed the door, breathing hard, his face burning in the darkness.
it was when he looked around to make absolutely sure that nobody was watching that he saw the dead
body on the floor.
fifteen minutes later the foyer was full of people and activity. quentin sat in a corner, in the cane
chair, like a pallbearer at the funeral of somebody hed never met. he kept the back of his skull
pressed firmly against the cool solid wall like it was his last point of connection to a same reality.
james stood next to him. he didnt seem to know where to put his hands. they didnt look at each
other.
the old man lay flat on his back on the floor. his stomach was a sizable round hump, his hair a
crazy gray einstein half-noggin. three paramedics crouched around him, two men and a woman. the
woman was disarmingly, almost inappropriately prettyshe looked out of place in that grim scene,
miscast. the paramedics were at work, but it wasnt the high-speed clinical blitz of an emergency
life-saving treatment. this was the other kind, the obligatory failed resuscitation. they were
murmuring in low voices, packing up, ripping off adhesive patches, discarding contaminated sharps in
a special container.
with a practiced, muscular movement one of the men de-intubated the corpse. the old mans mouth
was open, and quentin could see his dead gray tongue. he smelled something that he didnt want to
admit was the faint, bitter odor of shit.
this is bad, james said, not for the first time.
yes, quentin said thickly. extremely bad. his lips and teeth felt numb.
if he didnt move, nobody could involve him in this any further. he tried to breathe slowly and
keep still. he stared straight ahead, refusing to focus his eyes on what was happening in the den. he
knew if he looked at james he would only see his own mental state reflected back at him in an infinite
corridor of panic that led nowhere. he wondered when it would be all right for them to leave. he
couldnt get rid of a feeling of shame that he was the one who went into the house uninvited, as if that
had somehow caused the mans death.
i shouldnt have called him a pedophile, quentin said out loud. that was wrong.
extremely wrong, james agreed. they spoke slowly, like they were both trying out language for
the very first time.
one of the paramedics, the woman, stood up from where she was squatting by the body. quentin
watched her stretch, heels of her hands pressed to her lumbar region, tipping her head one way, then
the other. then she walked over in their direction, stripping off rubber gloves.
well, she announced cheerfully, hes dead! by her accent she was english.
quentin cleared his clotted throat. the woman chucked the gloves neatly into the trash from across
the room.
what happened to him?
cerebral hemorrhage. nice quick way to go, if you have to go. which he did. he must have been a
drinker.
she made the drinky-drinky gesture.
her cheeks were flushed from crouching down over the body. she might have been twenty-five at
most, and she wore a dark blue short-sleeved button-down shirt, neatly pressed, with one button that
didnt match: a stewardess on the connecting flight to hell. quentin wished she werent so attractive.
unpretty women were so much easier to deal with in some waysyou didnt have to face the pain of
their probable unattainability. but she was not unpretty. she was pale and thin and unreasonably
lovely, with a broad, ridiculously sexy mouth.
well. quentin didnt know what to say. im sorry.
why are you sorry? she said. did you kill him?
im just here for an interview. he did alumni interviews for princeton.
so why do you care?
quentin hesitated. he wondered if hed misunderstood the premise of this conversation. he stood
up, which he should have done when she first came over anyway. he was much taller than her. even
under the circumstances, he thought, this person is carrying around a lot of attitude for a paramedic.
its not like shes a real doctor or anything. he wanted to scan her chest for a name tag but didnt want
to get caught looking at her breasts.
i dont actually care about him, personally, quentin said carefully, but i do place a certain value
on human life in the abstract. so even though i didnt know him, i think i can say that im sorry that
hes dead.
what if he was a monster? maybe he really was a pedophile.
shed overheard him.
maybe. maybe he was a nice guy. maybe he was a saint.
maybe.
you must spend a lot of time around dead people. out of the corner of his eye he was vaguely
aware that james was watching this exchange, baffled.
well, youre supposed to keep them alive. or thats what they tell us.
it must be hard.
the dead ones are a lot less trouble.
quieter.
exactly.
the look in her eyes didnt quite match what she was saying. she was studying him.
listen, james cut in. we should probably go.
whats your hurry? she said. her eyes hadnt left quentins. unlike practically everybody, she
seemed more interested in him than in james. listen, i think this guy might have left something for
you.
she picked up two manila envelopes, document-size, off a marble-topped side table. quentin
frowned.
i dont think so.
we should probably go, james said.
you said that already, the paramedic said.
james opened the door. the cold air was a pleasant shock. it felt real. that was what quentin
needed: more reality. less of this, whatever this was.
seriously, the woman said. i think you should take these. it might be important.
her eyes wouldnt leave quentins face. the day had gone still around them. it was chilly on the
stoop, and getting a little damp, and he was roughly ten yards away from a corpse.
listen, were gonna go, james was saying. thanks. im sure you did everything you could.
the pretty paramedics dark hair was in two heavy ropes of braid. she wore a shiny yellow
enamel ring and some kind of fancy silver antique wristwatch. her nose and chin were tiny and
pointy. she was a pale, skinny, pretty angel of death, and she held two manila envelopes with their
names on them in block magic marker letters. probably transcripts, confidential recommendations.
for some reason, maybe just because he knew james wouldnt, quentin took the one with his name on
it.
all right! good-bye! the paramedic sang. she twirled back into the house and closed the door.
they were alone on the stoop.
well, james said. he inhaled through his nose and breathed out firmly.
quentin nodded, as if he were agreeing with something james had said. slowly they walked back
up the path to the sidewalk. he still felt dazed. he didnt especially want to talk to james.
listen, james said. you probably shouldnt have that.
i know, quentin said.
you could still put it back, you know. i mean, what if they found out?
how would they find out?
i dont know.
who knows whats in here? could come in useful.
yeah, well, lucky thing that guy died then! james said irritably.
they walked to the end of the block without speaking, annoyed at each other and not wanting to
admit it. the slate sidewalk was wet, and the sky was white with rain. quentin knew he probably
shouldnt have taken the envelope. he was pissed at himself for taking it and pissed at james for not
taking his.
look, ill see you later, james said. i gotta go meet jules at the library.
right.
they shook hands formally. it felt strangely final. quentin walked away slowly down first street.
a man had died in the house he just left. he was still in a dream. he realizedmore shamethat
underneath it all he was relieved that he didnt have to do his princeton interview today after all.
the day was darkening. the sun was setting already behind the gray shell of cloud that covered
brooklyn. for the first time in an hour he thought about all the things he had left to do today: physics
problem set, history paper, e-mail, dishes, laundry. the weight of them was dragging him back down
the gravity well of the ordinary world. he would have to explain to his parents what happened, and
they would, in some way he could never grasp, and therefore could never properly rebut, make him
feel like it was his fault. it would all go back to normal. he thought of julia and james meeting at the
library. she would be working on her western civ paper for mr. karras, a six-week project she
would complete in two sleepless days and nights. as ardently as he wished that she were his, and not
jamess, he could never quite imagine how he would win her. in the most plausible of his many
fantasies james died, unexpectedly and painlessly, leaving julia behind to sink softly weeping into his
arms.
as he walked quentin unwound the little red-threaded clasp that held shut the manila envelope. he
saw immediately that it wasnt his transcript, or an official document of any kind. the envelope held
a notebook. it was old-looking, its corners squashed and rubbed till they were smooth and round, its
cover foxed.
the first page, handwritten in ink, read:
the magicians
book six of fillory and further
the ink had gone brown with age. the magicians was not the name of any book by christopher
plover that quentin knew of. and any good nerd knew that there were only five books in the fillory
series.
when he turned the page a piece of white notepaper, folded over once, flew out and slipped away
on the wind. it clung to a wrought-iron area fence for a second before the wind whipped it away
again.
there was a community garden on the block, a triangular snippet of land too narrow and weirdly
shaped to be snapped up by developers. with its ownership a black hole of legal ambiguity, it had
been taken over years ago by a collective of enterprising neighbors who had trucked out the acid sand
native to brooklyn and replaced it with rich, fertile loam from upstate. for a while theyd raised
pumpkins and tomatoes and spring bulbs and raked out little japanese serenity gardens, but lately
theyd neglected it, and hardy urban weeds had taken root instead. they were running riot and
strangling their frailer, more exotic competitors. it was into this tangled thicket that the note flew and
disappeared.
this late in the year all the plants were dead or dying, even the weeds, and quentin waded into
them hip-deep, dry stems catching on his pants, his leather shoes crunching brown broken glass. it
crossed his mind that the note might just possibly contain the hot paramedics phone number. the
garden was narrow, but it went surprisingly far back. there were three or four sizable trees in it, and
the farther in he pushed the darker and more overgrown it got.
he caught a glimpse of the note, up high, plastered against a trellis encrusted with dead vines. it
could clear the back fence before he caught up with it. his phone rang: his dad. quentin ignored it.
out of the corner of his eye he thought he saw something flit past behind the bracken, large and pale,
but when he turned his head it was gone. he pushed past the corpses of gladiolas, petunias, shoulderhigh sunflowers, rosebushesbrittle, stiff stems and flowers frozen in death into ornate toile patterns.
he would have thought hed gone all the way through to seventh avenue by now. he shoved his
way even deeper in, brushing up against who knew what toxic flora. a case of poison fucking ivy,
thats all he needed now. it was odd to see that here and there among the dead plants a few vital green
stalks still poked up, drawing sustenance from who knew where. he caught a whiff of something
sweet in the air.
he stopped. all of a sudden it was quiet. no car horns, no stereos, no sirens. his phone had
stopped ringing. it was bitter cold, and his fingers were numb. turn back or go on? he squeezed
farther in through a hedge, closing his eyes and squinching up his face against the scratchy twigs. he
stumbled over something, an old stone. he felt suddenly nauseous. he was sweating.
when he opened his eyes again he was standing on the edge of a huge, wide, perfectly level green
lawn surrounded by trees. the smell of ripe grass was overpowering. there was hot sun on his face.
the sun was at the wrong angle. and where the hell were the clouds? the sky was a blinding blue.
his inner ear spun sickeningly. he held his breath for a few seconds, then expelled freezing winter air
from his lungs and breathed in warm summer air in its place. it was thick with floating pollen. he
sneezed.
in the middle distance beyond the wide lawn a large house stood, all honey-colored stone and gray
slate, adorned with chimneys and gables and towers and roofs and sub-roofs. in the center, over the
main house, was a tall, stately clock tower that struck even quentin as an odd addition to what
otherwise looked like a private residence. the clock was in the venetian style: a single barbed hand
circling a face with twenty-four hours marked on it in roman numerals. over one wing rose what
looked like the green oxidized-copper dome of an observatory. between house and lawn was a series
of inviting landscaped terraces and spinneys and hedges and fountains.
quentin was pretty sure that if he stood very still for a few seconds everything would snap back to
normal. he wondered if he was undergoing some dire neurological event. he looked cautiously back
over his shoulder. there was no sign of the garden behind him, just some big leafy oak trees, the
advance guard of what looked like a pretty serious forest. a rill of sweat ran down his rib cage from
his left armpit. it was hot.
quentin dropped his bag on the turf and shrugged out of his overcoat. a bird chirped languidly in
the silence. fifty feet away a tall skinny teenager was leaning against a tree, smoking a cigarette and
watching him.
he looked about quentins age. he wore a button-down shirt with a sharp collar and very thin,
very pale pink stripes. he didnt look at quen tin, just dragged on his cigarette and exhaled into the
summer air. the heat didnt seem to bother him.
hey, quentin called.
now he looked over. he raised his chin at quentin, once, but didnt answer.
quentin walked over, as nonchalantly as he could. he really didnt want to look like somebody
who had no idea what was going on. even without his coat on he was sweating like a bastard. he felt
like an overdressed english explorer trying to impress a skeptical tropical native. but there was
something he had to ask.
is this? quentin cleared his throat. so is this fillory? he squinted against the bright sun.
the young man looked at quentin very seriously. he took another long drag on his cigarette, then he
shook his head slowly, blowing out the smoke.
nope, he said. upstate new york.
he didnt laugh. quentin would appreciate that later.
upstate? quentin said. what, like vassar?
i saw you come through, the young man said. come on, you need to go up to the house.
he snapped the cigarette away and set off across the wide lawn. he didnt look back to see if
quentin was following, which at first quentin didnt, but then a sudden fear of being left alone in this
place got him moving and he trotted to catch up.
the green was enormous, the size of half a dozen football fields. it seemed to take them forever to
get across it. the sun beat on the back of quentins neck.
so whats your name? the young man asked, in a tone that made sure quentin knew that he had no
interest in the answer.
quentin.
charming. from?
brooklyn.
how old?
seventeen.
im eliot. dont tell me anything else, i dont want to know. dont want to get attached.
quentin had to take a couple of double-time steps to keep up with eliot. there was something off
about eliots face. his posture was very straight, but his mouth was twisted to one side, in a
permanent half grimace that revealed a nest of teeth sticking both in and out at improbable angles. he
looked like a child who had been slightly misdelivered, with some subpar forceps handling by the
attending.
but despite his odd appearance eliot had an air of effortless self-possession that made quentin
urgently want to be his friend, or maybe just be him period. he was obviously one of those people
who felt at home in the worldhe was naturally buoyant, where quentin felt like he had to dogpaddle constantly, exhaustingly, humiliatingly, just to get one sip of air.
so what is this place? quentin asked. do you live here?
you mean here at brakebills? he said airily. yes, i guess i do. they had reached the far side of
the grass. if you can call it living.
eliot led quentin through a gap in a tall hedge and into a leafy, shadowy labyrinth. the bushes had
been trimmed precisely into narrow, branching, fractally ramifying corridors that periodically opened
out onto small shady alcoves and courtyards. the shrubbery was so dense that no light penetrated
through it, but here and there a heavy yellow stripe of sun fell across the path from above. they
passed a plashing fountain here, a somber, rain-ravaged white stone statue there.
it was a good five minutes before they stepped out of the maze, through an opening flanked by two
towering topiary bears reared up on their hind legs, onto a stone terrace in the shadow of the large
house quentin had seen from a distance. a breeze made one of the tall, leafy bears seem to turn its
head slightly in his direction.
the dean will probably be down to get you in another minute, eliot said. heres my advice. sit
therehe pointed to a weathered stone bench, like he was telling an overly affectionate dog to stay
and try to look like you belong here. and if you tell him you saw me smoking, i will banish you to
the lowest circle of hell. which ive never been there, but if even half of what i hear is true its
almost as bad as brooklyn.
eliot disappeared back into the hedge maze, and quentin sat down obediently on the bench. he
stared down between his shiny black interview shoes at the gray stone tiles, his backpack and his
overcoat in his lap. this is impossible, he thought lucidly; he thought the words in his mind, but they
got no purchase on the world around him. he felt like he was having a not-unpleasant drug
experience. the tiles were intricately carved with a pattern of twiny vines, or possibly elaborately
calligraphic words that had been worn away into illegibility. little motes and seeds drifted around in
the sunlight. if this is a hallucination, he thought, its pretty damn hi-res.
the silence was the strangest part of it. as hard as he listened he couldnt hear a single car. it felt
like he was in a movie where the sound track had abruptly cut out.
a pair of french doors rattled a few times and then opened. a tall, fat man wearing a seersucker
suit strode out onto the terrace.
good afternoon, he said. you would be quentin coldwater.
he spoke very correctly, as if he wished he had an english accent but wasnt quite pretentious
enough to affect one. he had a mild, open face and thin blond hair.
yes, sir. quentin had never called an adultor anybody elsesir in his life, but it suddenly felt
appropriate.
welcome to brakebills college, the man said. i suppose youve heard of us?
actually no, quentin said.
well, youve been offered a preliminary examination here. do you accept?
quentin didnt know what to say. this wasnt one of the questions hed prepped for when he got up
this morning.
i dont know, he said, blinking. i mean, i guess im not sure.
perfectly understandable response, but not an acceptable one, im afraid. i need a yes or a no. its
just for the exam, he added helpfully.
quentin had a powerful intuition that if he said no, all of this would be over before the syllable
was even fully out of his mouth, and he would be left standing in the cold rain and dog shit of first
street wondering why hed seemed to feel the warmth of the sun on the back of his neck for a second
just then. he wasnt ready for that. not yet.
sure, okay, he said, not wanting to sound too eager. yeah.
splendid. he was one of those superficially jolly people whose jolliness didnt quite reach all
the way up to his eyes. lets get you examined. my name is henry foggno jokes please, ive
heard them alland you may address me as dean. follow me. youre the last one to arrive, i think,
he added.
no jokes actually came to quentins mind. inside the house it was hushed and cool, and there was a
rich, spicy smell in the air of books and oriental carpets and old wood and tobacco. the dean
walked ahead of him impatiently. it took quentin a minute for his eyes to adjust. they hurried through
a sitting room hung with murky oil paintings, down a narrow wood-paneled hallway, then up several
flights of stairs to a heavy-timbered wooden door.
the instant it opened hundreds of eyes flicked up and fixed themselves on quentin. the room was
long and airy and full of individual wooden desks arranged in rows. at each desk sat a seriouslooking teenager. it was a classroom, but not the kind quentin was used to, where the walls were
cinder block and covered with bulletin boards and posters with kittens hanging from branches with
hang in there, baby under them in balloon letters. the walls of this room were old stone. it
was full of sunlight, and it stretched back and back and back. it looked like a trick with mirrors.
most of the kids were quentins age and appeared to occupy his same general stratum of coolness
or lack thereof. but not all. there were a few punks with mohawks or shaved heads, and there was a
substantial goth contingent and one of those super jews, a hasid. a too-tall girl with too-big redframed glasses beamed goofily at everybody. a few of the younger girls looked like theyd been
crying. one kid had no shirt on and green and red tattoos all over his back. jesus, quentin thought,
whose parents would let them do that? another was in a motorized wheelchair. another was missing
his left arm. he wore a dark button-down shirt with one sleeve folded up and held closed with a
silver clasp.
all the desks were identical, and on each one an ordinary blank blue test booklet was laid out with
a very thin, very sharp no. 3 pencil next to it. it was the first thing quentin had seen here that was
familiar. there was one empty seat, toward the back of the room, and he sat down and scooched his
chair forward with a deafening screech. he almost thought he saw julias face in among the crowd,
but she turned away almost immediately, and anyway there was no time. at the front of the room dean
fogg cleared his throat primly.
all right, he said. a few preliminaries. there will be silence during the examination. you are
free to look at other students papers, but you will find that they appear to you to be blank. your
pencils will not require additional sharpening. if you would like a glass of water, just hold up three
fingers above your head, like this. he demonstrated.
do not worry about feeling unprepared for the examination. there is no way to study for it, though
it would be equally true to say that you have been preparing for it your whole lives. there are only
two possible grades, pass and fail. if you pass, you will proceed to the second stage of the
examination. if you fail, and most of you will, you will be returned to your homes with a plausible
alibi and very little memory of this entire experience.
the duration of the test is two and one half hours. begin.
the dean turned to the blackboard and drew a clock face on it. quen tin looked down at the blank
booklet on his desk. it was no longer blank. it was filling with questions; the letters literally swam
into being on the paper as he watched.
the room filled with a collective rustling of paper, like a flock of birds taking off. heads bowed in
unison. quentin recognized this motion. it was the motion of a bunch of high-powered type-a test
killers getting down to their bloody work.
that was all right. he was one of them.
quentin hadnt planned on spending the rest of his afternoonor morning, or whatever this was
taking a standardized test on an unknown subject, at an unknown educational institution, in some
unknown alternate climatic zone where it was still summer. he was supposed to be in brooklyn
freezing his ass off and being interviewed by some random senior citizen, currently deceased. but the
logic of his immediate circumstances was overwhelming his other concerns, however well founded
they might be. he had never been one to argue with logic.
a lot of the test was calculus, pretty basic stuff for quentin, who was so mysteriously good at math
that his high school had been forced to outsource that part of his education to brooklyn college.
nothing more hazardous than some fancy differential geometry and a few linear algebra proofs. but
there were more exotic questions, too. some of them seemed totally pointless. one of them showed
him the back of a playing cardnot an actual card but a drawing of the back of a playing card, mind
you, featuring your standard twin angels riding bicyclesand asked him to guess what card it was.
how did that make sense?
or later on the test gave him a passage from the tempest, then asked him to make up a fake
language, and then translate the shakespeare into the made-up language. he was then asked questions
about the grammar and orthography of his made-up language, and thenhonestly, what was the point?
questions about the made-up geography and culture and society of the made-up country where his
made-up language was so fluently spoken. then he had to translate the original passage from the fake
language back into english, paying particular attention to any resulting distortions in grammar, word
choice, and meaning. seriously. he always gave everything he had on tests, but in this case he wasnt
totally sure what he was supposed to give.
the test also changed as he took it. the reading-comprehension section showed him a paragraph
that vanished as he read it, then quizzed him on its contents. some new kind of computerized paper
hadnt he read somewhere that somebody was working on that? digital ink? amazing resolution,
though. he was asked to draw a rabbit that wouldnt keep still as he drew itas soon as it had paws
it scratched itself luxuriously and then went hopping off around the page, nibbling at the other
questions, so that he had to chase it with the pencil to finish filling in the fur. he wound up pacifying it
with some hastily sketched radishes and then drawing a fence around it to keep it in line.
soon he forgot about everything else except putting a satisfactory chunk of his neat handwriting next
to one question after another, appeasing whatever perverse demands the test made on him. it was an
hour before he even looked up from his desk. his ass hurt. he shifted in his chair. the patches of
sunlight from the windows had moved.
something else had changed, too. when hed started every single desk had been filled, but now
there was a sprinkling of empty ones. he hadnt noticed anybody leaving. a cold crystal seed of
doubt formed in quentins stomach. jesus, they must have finished already. he wasnt used to being
outclassed in the classroom. the palms of his hands prickled with sweat, and he smeared them along
his thighs. who were these people?
when quentin flipped to the next page of the test booklet it was blank except for a single word in
the center of the page: fin, in swirly italic type, like at the end of an old movie.
he sat back in the chair and pressed the heels of his aching hands against his aching eyes. well, that
was two hours of his life hed never get back. quentin still hadnt noticed anybody getting up and
walking out, but the room was getting seriously depopulated. there were maybe fifty kids left, and
more empty desks than full ones. it was like they were softly and silently slipping out of the room
every time he turned his head. the punk with the tattoos and no shirt was still there. he must have
finished, or given up, because he was dicking around by ordering more and more glasses of water.
his desktop was crowded with glasses. quentin spent the last twenty minutes staring out the window
and practicing a spinning trick with his pencil.
the dean came in again and addressed the room.
im delighted to inform you all that you will be moving on to the next stage of testing, he said.
this stage will be conducted on an individual basis by members of the brakebills faculty. in the
meantime, you may enjoy some refreshment and converse among yourselves.
quentin counted only twenty-two desks still occupied, maybe a tenth of the original group.
bizarrely, a silent, comically correct butler in white gloves entered and began circulating through the
room. he gave each of them a wooden tray with a sandwichroasted red peppers and very fresh
mozza rella on sourdough breada lumpy pear, and a thick square of dark, bitter chocolate. he
poured each student a glass of something cloudy and fizzy from an individual bottle without a label. it
turned out to be grapefruit soda.
quentin took his lunch and drifted up to the front row, where most of the rest of the test takers were
gathering. he felt pathetically relieved to have gotten this far, even though he had no idea why hed
passed and the others had failed, or what hed get for passing. the butler was patiently loading the
clinking, sloshing collection of water glasses from the punks desk onto a tray. quentin looked for
julia, but either she hadnt made the cut or shed never been there in the first place.
they should have capped it, explained the punk, who said his name was penny. he had a gentle
moony face that was at odds with his otherwise terrifying appearance. how much water you can ask
for. like maybe five glasses at most. i love finding shit like that, where the system screws itself with
its own rules.
he shrugged.
anyway, i was bored. the test told me i was done after twenty minutes.
twenty minutes? quentin was torn between admiration and envy. jesus christ, it took me two
hours.
the punk shrugged again and made a face: what the hell do you want me to say?
among the test takers, camaraderie warred with mistrust. some of the kids exchanged names and
home towns and cautious observations about the test, though the more they compared notes, the more
they realized that none of them had taken the same one. they were from all over the country, except
for two who turned out to be from the same inuit reservation in saskatchewan. they went around the
room telling stories about how theyd gotten here. no two were exactly the same, but there was
always a certain family resemblance. somebody went looking for a lost ball in an alley, or a stray
goat in a drainage ditch, or followed an inexplicable extra cable in the high school computer room
which led to a server closet that had never been there before. and then green grass and summer heat
and somebody to take them up to the exam room.
as soon as lunch was over teachers began poking their heads in and calling out the names of
candidates. they went alphabetically, so it was only a couple of minutes before a stern woman in her
forties with dark shoulder-length hair summoned quentin coldwater. he followed her into a narrow
wood-paneled room with tall windows that looked out from a surprisingly great height onto the lawn
hed crossed earlier. chatter from the adjacent exam room cut off abruptly when the door closed. two
chairs faced each other across a worn, hugely thick wooden table.
quentin felt giddy, like he was watching the whole thing on tv. it was ridiculous. but he forced
himself to pay attention. this was a competition, and he dominated competitions. that was what he
did, and he sensed that the stakes of this one were rising. the table was bare except for a deck of
cards and a stack of about a dozen coins.
i understand you like magic tricks, quentin, the woman said. she had a very slight accent,
european but otherwise unplaceable. icelandic? why dont you show me some?
as a matter of fact, quentin did like magic tricks. his interest in magic had started three years ago,
partly inspired by his reading habits but mostly as a way of fattening up his extracurriculars with an
activity that wouldnt force him to actually interact with other people. quentin had spent hundreds of
emotionally arid hours with his ipod on palming coins and shuffling cards and producing fake flowers
from skinny plastic canes in a trance of boredom. he watched and rewatched grainy, porn-like
instructional videotapes in which middle-aged men demonstrated close-up magic passes in front of
backdrops made of bedsheets. magic, quentin discovered, wasnt romantic at all. it was grim and
repetitive and deceptive. and he worked his ass off and became very good at it.
there was a store near quentins house that sold magic supplies, along with junk electronics, dusty
board games, pet rocks, and fake vomit. ricky, the man behind the counter, who had a beard and
sideburns but no mustache, like an amish farmer, grudgingly agreed to give quentin some tips. it
wasnt long before the student surpassed the master. at seventeen quen tin knew the scotch and soda
and the tricky one-handed charlier cut, and he could juggle the elusive mills mess pattern with three
balls and sometimes, for short ecstatic flights, with four. he earned a small dividend of popularity at
school every time he demonstrated his ability to throw, with a fierce, robotic accuracy, an ordinary
playing card sidearm so that from a distance of ten feet it stuck edge-on in one of the flavorless
styrofoamy apples they served in the cafeteria.
quentin reached for the cards first. he was vain about his shuffling, so he broke out a faro shuffle
rather than the standard riffle just in casefat chancethe woman sitting across from him knew the
difference, and how ridiculously hard it was to do a good faro.
he ran through his usual routine, which was already calculated to show off as many different skills
as possible: false cuts, false shuffles, lifts, sleights, passes, forces. in between tricks he tossed and
waterfalled and avalanched the cards from hand to hand. he had regular patter to go with it, but it
sounded clumsy and empty in this quiet, airy, beautiful room, in front of this dignified, handsome
older woman. the words trailed off. he performed in silence.
the cards made shushing, snapping noises in the stillness. the woman watched him steadily,
obediently choosing a card whenever he asked her to, showing no surprise when he recovered it
against all odds!from the middle of a thoroughly shuffled deck, or from his shirt pocket, or out of
thin air.
he switched to the coins. they were fresh new nickels, nicely milled, good crisp edges. he had no
props, no cups or folded handkerchiefs, so he stuck to palms and passes, flourishes and catches. the
woman watched him in silence for a minute, then reached across the table and touched his arm.
do that one again, she said.
he obediently did that one again. the trick was an old one, the wandering nickel, wherein a nickel
(actually three nickels) moved mysteriously from hand to hand. he kept showing it to the audience
and then cheekily vanishing it again; then he pretended to lose track of it entirely; then he triumphantly
produced it again, whereupon it appeared to vanish again straight out of his open palm, in plain sight.
it was actually a fairly ordinary, if well-scripted, sequence of steals and drops, with one particularly
nervy retention-of-vision vanish.
do it again.
he did it again. she stopped him in the middle.
this partthere is a mistake.
where? he frowned. thats how you do it.
she pursed her lips and shook her head.
the woman plucked three nickels from the stack and without an instant of hesitation, or anything in
her manner that acknowledged that she was doing something special, performed the wandering nickel
perfectly. quen tin couldnt stop staring at her small, limber brown hands. her movements were
smoother and more precise than any professionals hed ever seen.
she stopped in the middle.
see here, where the second coin must go from hand to hand? you need a reverse pass, holding it
like so. here, come around so you can see.
he obediently trotted around to her side of the table and stood behind her, trying not to look down
her blouse. her hands were smaller than his, but the nickel vanished between her fingers like a bird
into a thicket. she did the move for him slowly, backward and forward, breaking it down.
thats what im doing, he said.
show me.
now she was openly smiling. she grasped his wrist to stop him mid-pass.
now. where is the second coin?
he held out his hands, palm up. the coin was . . . but there was no coin. it was gone. he turned his
hands over, waggled his fingers, looked on the table, in his lap, on the floor. nothing. it had
disappeared. did she nick it while he wasnt looking? with those fast hands and that mona lisa
smile, he couldnt quite put it past her.
it is what i thought, she said, standing up. thank you, quentin, i will send in the next examiner.
quentin watched her go, still patting his pockets for the missing coin. for the first time in his life he
couldnt tell if hed passed or failed.
the whole afternoon went like that: professors parading in through one door and out the other. it was
like a dream, a long, rambling dream with no obvious meaning. there was an old man with a shaky
head who fumbled in his pants pockets and threw a bunch of frayed, yellowed knotted cords on the
table, then stood there with a stopwatch as quentin untied them. a shy, pretty young woman, who
looked like she was barely older than quentin, asked him to draw a map of the house and the grounds
based on what hed seen since hed been here. a slick fellow with a huge head and who wouldnt or
couldnt stop talking challenged him to a weird variant of blitz chess. after a while you couldnt even
take it seriouslyit felt like it was his credulity that was being tested. a fat man with red hair and a
self-important air released a tiny lizard with iridescent humming-bird wings and huge, alert eyes into
the room. the man said nothing, just folded his arms and sat on the edge of the table, which creaked
unhappily under his weight.
for lack of a better idea quentin tried to coax the lizard to land on his finger. it flew down and
nipped a tiny chunk out of his forearm, drawing a dot of blood, then zipped away and buzzed against
the window like a bumblebee. the fat man silently handed quentin a band-aid, collected his lizard,
and left.
finally the door closed and didnt open again. quentin took a deep breath and rolled his shoulders.
apparently the procession had ended, though nobody bothered to say anything to quentin. at least he
had a few minutes to himself. by now the sun was setting. he couldnt see it from the exam room, but
he could see a fountain, and the light reflected in the pool of the fountain was a cool burnt orange. a
mist was rising up through the trees. the grounds were deserted.
he rubbed his face with his hands. his head was clearing. it occurred to him, long after it probably
should have, to wonder what the hell his parents were thinking. normally they were pretty indifferent
to his comings and goings, but even they had their limits. school had been out for hours now. maybe
they thought his interview had run long, though the chances that they even remembered quentin was
supposed to have had an interview were pretty small. or if it was summer here, maybe school hadnt
even started yet? the giddy haze hed been lost in all afternoon was starting to dissipate. he
wondered exactly how safe he was here. if this was a dream, he was going to have to wake up pretty
soon.
through the closed door he distinctly heard the sound of somebody crying: a boy, and way too old
to be crying in front of other people. a teacher was speaking to him quietly and firmly, but the boy
either wouldnt or couldnt stop. he ignored it, but it was a dangerous, unmanning sound, a sound that
clawed away at the outer layers of quentins hard-won teenage sangfroid. underneath it there was
something like fear. the voices faded as the boy was led away. quentin heard the dean speaking in
icy, clipped tones, trying not to sound angry.
im really not sure i care one way or the other anymore.
there was an answer, something inaudible.
if we dont have a quorum well simply send them all home and skip a year. foggs genteel
reserve was decaying. nothing would make me happier. we can rebuild the observatory. we can turn
the school into a nursing home for senile old professors. god knows we have enough of those.
inaudible.
there is a twentieth, melanie. we go through this every year, and we will empty every high
school and middle school and juvenile detention center till we find him or her or it. and if there isnt
i will happily resign, and it will be your problem, and youre welcome to it. right now i cant think
of anything that would make me happier.
the door opened a crack, and for an instant a worried face peered in at himit was quentins first
examiner, the dark-haired european lady with the clever fingers. he opened his mouth to ask about a
phonehis cell was down to one useless flickering barbut the door shut again. how annoying. was
it over? should he just leave? he made a face to himself. he was all for adventures, god knows, but
enough was enough. this one was getting old.
the room was almost dark. he looked around for a light switch, but there wasnt one; in fact all the
time hed been here he hadnt seen a single electrical device. no phones, no lights, no clocks. it was
a long time since quentin had had his sandwich and his square of dark chocolate, and he was hungry
again. he stood up and went to the window where it was lighter.
the panes of glass were wiggly with age. was he the last one left? what was taking so long? the
sky was a luminous royal blue dome swarming with huge lazy whorls of stars, van gogh stars that
would have been invisible in brooklyn, drowned in light pollution. he wondered how far upstate they
were, and what had happened to the note hed been chasing and never found. the book hed left
behind with his backpack in the first exam room; now he wished hed kept it with him. he imagined
his parents making dinner together in the kitchen, something steaming on the stove, his dad singing
along to something nightmarishly unhip, two glasses of red wine on the counter. he almost missed
them.
with no warning the door banged open and the dean walked in, talking over his shoulder at
somebody behind him.
a candidate? fine, he said sarcastically. lets see a candidate. and bring some goddamned
candles! he sat down at the table. his shirt was translucent with sweat. it was not impossible that
hed had a drink between now and the last time quentin had seen him. hello, quentin. please sit.
he indicated the other chair. quentin sat, and fogg rebuttoned his top button and hastily, irritably
whipped a tie out of his pocket.
the dark-haired woman followed fogg into the room, and after her came the old man with the
knots, the fat man with the lizard, then the rest of the dozen or so men and women who had paraded
through the room this afternoon. they formed lines along the walls, packed themselves into the
corners, craning to look at him, whispering to one another. the punk kid with the tattoos was there,
toohe slipped in just as the door was closing, unobserved by the faculty.
come on, come on. the dean waved them into the room. we should really do this in the
conservatory next year. pearl, you come around here. this to the young blond woman whod made
quentin draw a map.
now, he said when they were all inside. quentin. sit, please.
quentin was already sitting. he scooched in his chair a little farther.
dean fogg took out of one pocket a fresh pack of cards, the plastic wrap still on them, and from the
other he took a stack of nickels, maybe a dollars worth, which he put down too emphatically so that
they promptly slumped over. they both reached to restack them.
all right, lets get to it. fogg clapped his hands and rubbed them together. lets see some
magic!
he sat back in his chair and folded his arms.
hadnt they already done this part? quentin kept his face studiously calm and unworried, but his
mind was in free fall. slowly he unwrapped the stiff new cards, the plastic crackling deafeningly in
the excruciating stillness, and watched from a mental mile away as his hands dutifully riffled and
bridged them, riffled and bridged. he searched his brain for a trick he hadnt already done the first
time around. somebody coughed.
hed barely started his routine when fogg stopped him.
no, no-no-no-no. fogg chuckled, not especially kindly. not like that. i want to see some real
magic.
he knocked twice on the hard tabletop with his knuckles and sat back again. quentin took a deep
breath and searched foggs face for the good humor hed seen there earlier, but fogg just watched
expectantly. his eyes were a pale milky blue, paler than eyes usually were.
i dont really get what you mean, quentin said slowly, in the silence, like hed forgotten his line
in the school play and had to ask for it. what do you mean, real magic?
well, i dont know. fogg shot a hilarious sideways glance at the other teachers. i dont know
what i mean. you tell me what i mean.
quentin shuffled a couple more times, stalling. he didnt know what to do. he would do anything if
they would just tell him what he was supposed to do. this was it, he thought, he was coming to the
end. this is what failure feels like. he looked around the room, but every face was either blank or
avoiding his gaze. no one was going to help him. he was going back to brooklyn. maddeningly, he
could feel tears pooling in his eyes. he blinked them away. he so badly wanted not to care, but he
was falling backward, sinking down inside himself, and there was nothing there to catch him. this is
it, he thought. this was the test he couldnt pass. it wasnt really all that surprising. he just wondered
how long they were going to let it go on.
stop fucking with us, quentin! fogg barked. he snapped his fingers. come on. wake up!
he reached across the table and grabbed quentins hands roughly. the contact was a shock. his
fingers were strong and strangely dry and hot. he was moving quentins fingers, physically forcing
them into positions they didnt want to be in.
like this, he was saying. like this. like this.
okay, stop, quentin said. he tried to pull away. stop.
but fogg didnt stop. the audience shifted uncomfortably, and somebody said something. fogg kept
on working quentins hands with both of his, kneading them. he bent quentins fingers back,
stretching them apart so that the webs between his fingers burned. light seemed to flash between their
hands.
i said, stop it! quentin jerked his hands away.
it was surprising how good the anger felt. it was something to grab on to. in the shocked silence
that followed he took a deep breath and forced it out through his nose. when it was out he felt like
hed expelled some of his despair with it. hed had enough of being judged. hed been sucking it up
his whole life, but even he had his limit.
fogg was talking again, but now quentin wasnt even listening. he had begun to recite something
under his breath, something familiar. it took him a second to realize that the words he was mouthing
werent english; they were from the foreign language he had invented earlier that afternoon. it was an
obscure languagehed decidedindigenous to a single tropical archipelago, a languorous hotweather paradise, a gauguin painting, blessed with black sand beaches and breadfruit trees and
freshwater springs and endowed with an angry, glowing red volcano god and an oral culture rich in
obscene expletives. he spoke this language fluently, with no accent, like a native. the words he
spoke were not a prayer, exactly. more of an incantation.
quentin stopped shuffling the cards. there was no going back. everything snapped into very slow,
slow motion, as if the room had filled up with a viscous but perfectly clear liquid in which everyone
and everything floated easily and calmly. everyone and everything except for quen tin, who moved
quickly. with two hands together, as if he were releasing a dove, he tossed the deck of cards lightly
up to the ceiling. the deck broke apart and scattered in flight, like a meteorite losing cohesion in the
atmosphere, and as the cards fluttered back down to earth they stacked themselves on the tabletop.
they formed a house of cards. it was a recognizable, if impressionistic, model of the building they
were sitting in. the cards fell as if by chance, but each one perfectly, snapping into place
magnetically, edge to edge, one after other. the last two, the aces of spades and hearts, leaned up
against each other to make the roof over the clock tower.
now the room was absolutely still. dean fogg sat as if he were frozen in place. all the hairs were
standing up on quentins arms, but he knew what he was doing. his fingers left almost imperceptible
phosphorescent trails behind them in the air. he definitely felt high. he leaned forward and blew
lightly on the card house, and it collapsed back down into a neatly stacked deck. he turned the deck
over and fanned it out on the table like a blackjack dealer. every card was a queenall the standard
suits, plus other suits that didnt exist, in different colors, green and yellow and blue. the queen of
horns, the queen of clocks, the queen of bees, the queen of books. some were clothed, some were
shamelessly naked. some of them had julias face. some of them had the lovely paramedics.
dean fogg watched quentin intently. everybody watched him. watch this: quentin squared the
deck again and with no particular effort ripped it in half and then ripped the halves in half and tossed
the resulting confetti at the assembled company, who all flinched except for fogg.
he stood up. his chair fell over backward.
tell me where i am, quentin said softly. tell me what im doing here.
he picked up the stack of nickels in his fist, only it was no longer a stack of coins, it was the hilt of
a bright, burning sword that he drew easily out of the tabletop, as if it had been left there buried up to
the hilt.
tell me whats going on here, quentin said, louder, to the room. and if this place isnt fillory,
then for fucks sake will somebody please tell me where the hell i am?
quentin let the tip of the sword hover under foggs nose for a slow ten-count, then he reversed his
grip and stabbed it down into the wood of the table. the point bit deep into the buttery wood and
stuck there.
fogg didnt move. the sword waggled in place. quentin sniffed involuntarily. the last of the light
from the window died. it was night.
well now, the dean said finally. he removed a neatly folded handkerchief from his pocket and
patted his forehead. i think we can all agree that that was a pass.
somebodyit was the old guy with the knotsput a reassuring hand on quentins back and gently,
with surprising strength, drew the sword out of the table and laid it safely on its side. a slow patter of
applause arose from the assembled examiners. it quickly turned into an ovation.

